Migrate Flink and Kafka HowTo (#1232)
aiven/devportal: docs/products/kafka/howto/flink-with-aiven-for-kafka.rst

Use Apache Flink® with Aiven for Apache Kafka®
======================================================

`Apache Flink® <https://flink.apache.org/>`_ is an open source platform for processing distributed streaming and batch data.
Where Apache Kafka® excels at receiving and sending event streams, Flink consumes, transforms, aggregates, and enriches your data.

The example in this article shows you how to create a simple Java Flink job that reads data from a Kafka topic, processes it, and then pushes it to a different Kafka topic.

.. Note::

   If you want to experience the power of streaming SQL transformations with Flink, Aiven provides a hosted :doc:`/docs/products/flink` with built-in data flow integration with Aiven for Apache Kafka®.

>    This example demonstrates using the Java API on a `local installation of Apache Flink 1.15.1 <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/try-flink/local_installation/>`_, but it can be applied to use Aiven for Apache Kafka with any self-hosted cluster.

Author: There's a couple of strategies for registered marks -- it looks like the recommendation and practice is to mark the first major title and first major mentions !  I took my cue from https://developer.aiven.io/docs/products/kafka/howto/kafka-streams-with-aiven-for-kafka.html and https://www.apache.org/foundation/marks/guide#howoften

I don't mind marking all mentions, WDYT?

>    This example demonstrates using the Java API on a `local installation of Apache Flink 1.15.1 <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/try-flink/local_installation/>`_, but it can be applied to use Aiven for Apache Kafka with any self-hosted cluster.

Reviewer: The standard approach in devportal is to add ® to the first instance only :)

.. _kafka-flink-prereq:

Prerequisites
-------------

> You need an Aiven for Apache Kafka service up and running with two topics, named ``test-flink-input`` and ``test-flink-output`` already created. Furthermore, for the example, you need to collect the following information about the Aiven for Apache Kafka service:

Reviewer 2: The topic creation could be automated in the example, although requiring the user to use Aiven Console or Client makes our services more familiar. Should a link to Aiven for Apache Kafka instructions be here, https://developer.aiven.io/docs/products/kafka/howto/create-topic

Author: :+1:  I think I prefer to refer to the docs to keep the document focused!  (Also, setting `auto.create.topics.enable` is probably not a great practice for users copy/pasting this code).

Reviewer 2: I did not specifically recommend the `auto.create.topics.enable`, but having the example to create topic e.g. Kafka admin client.

Author: Oh, I just meant that to point out that the "one-liner" way of doing the autocreate is probably not great!  So I'll go with the link (which is my preference when doing code tutorials).

* The truststore is available at ``TRUSTSTORE_PATH/client.truststore.jks``
* For simplicity, the same secret (password) is used for both the keystore and the truststore, and is shown here as ``KEY_TRUST_SECRET``

Use Flink with Aiven for Apache Kafka
-------------------------------------

The following example shows how to customise the ``DataStreamJob`` generated from the `Quickstart <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/configuration/overview/>`_ to work with Aiven for Apache Kafka.

1. Generate a Flink job skeleton named ``capitalizer`` using the Maven archetype:

   .. code:: shell

      mvn archetype:generate -DinteractiveMode=false \
        -DarchetypeGroupId=org.apache.flink -DarchetypeArtifactId=flink-quickstart-java \
        -DarchetypeVersion=1.15.1 -DgroupId=com.example -DartifactId=capitalizer \
        -Dversion=0.0.1-SNAPSHOT

2. Uncomment the Kafka connector in `pom.xml`:

   .. code:: xml

      <dependency>
        <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
        <artifactId>flink-connector-kafka</artifactId>
        <version>${flink.version}</version>
      </dependency>

> Customizing the ``DataStreamJob`` application

Reviewer 2: Expanding on what @snuyanzin commented of full example. There are two alternatives more, diff file to load and patch on top of generated example. Or a quickstart script approach what Flink documentation uses on https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/configuration/overview/#getting-started. Hard to navigate, but click the `Gradle` tab and scroll down a bit to `Quickstart script`.

''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Create a :doc:`Java keystore and truststore <keystore-truststore>` for the Aiven for Apache Kafka service.
For the following example we assume:

* The keystore is available at ``KEYSTORE_PATH/client.keystore.p12``
* The truststore is available at ``TRUSTSTORE_PATH/client.truststore.jks``
* For simplicity, the same secret (password) is used for both the keystore and the truststore, and is shown here as ``KEY_TRUST_SECRET``

Use Flink with Aiven for Apache Kafka
-------------------------------------

The following example shows how to customise the ``DataStreamJob`` generated from the `Quickstart <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/configuration/overview/>`_ to work with Aiven for Apache Kafka.

The full code to run this example can be found in the `Aiven examples GitHub repository <https://github.com/aiven/aiven-examples/tree/master/kafka/flink-capitalizer>`_.

1. Generate a Flink job skeleton named ``flink-capitalizer`` using the Maven archetype:

   .. code:: shell

      mvn archetype:generate -DinteractiveMode=false \
        -DarchetypeGroupId=org.apache.flink -DarchetypeArtifactId=flink-quickstart-java \

>         -DarchetypeVersion=1.15.1 -DgroupId=com.example -DartifactId=flink-capitalizer \

Author: Super :+1:  I'll make the change to the `groupId` and add a specific package to avoid collisions with a future example.

Use Apache Flink® with Aiven for Apache Kafka®
======================================================

`Apache Flink® <https://flink.apache.org/>`_ is an open source platform for processing distributed streaming and batch data.

> Where Apache Kafka® excels at receiving and sending event streams, Flink consumes, transforms, aggregates, and enriches your data.

Reviewer: I would add a paragraph after this saying that you can experience the power of streaming SQL transformation using Aiven for Apache Flink (with the link to the relevant docs sections).

Author: My clarification (now below) used to be right here!  I'll move it back up to the top and use your wording.

I'll ask someone to follow along and check the code.

> The example in this article shows you how to create a simple Java Flink job that reads data from a Kafka topic, processes it, and then pushes it to a different Kafka topic.

Reviewer: Since our Flink doesn't offer the option to submit java jobs I would call out the case specifically. Like

> If you are more keen in exploring Flink Java API to read data from an Aiven for Apache Kafka topic, this example shows how to connect, read, process and then push the results to another Kafka topic.

> .. _kafka-flink-prereq:

Reviewer: Don't worry about the error here, it's related to #1235

Prerequisites
-------------

You need an Aiven for Apache Kafka service up and running.

> Two topics named ``test-flink-input`` and ``test-flink-output`` should be created. Furthermore, for the example, you need to collect the following information about the Aiven for Apache Kafka service:

Reviewer: I would combine the previous sentence and this one like 
```suggestion
You need an Aiven for Apache Kafka service up and running with two topics, named ``test-flink-input`` and ``test-flink-output`` already created. Furthermore, for the example, you need to collect the following information about the Aiven for Apache Kafka service:
```

* ``APACHE_KAFKA_HOST``: The hostname of the Apache Kafka service
* ``APACHE_KAFKA_PORT``: The port of the Apache Kafka service

> You need to have Apache Maven™ installed to build the example.

Reviewer: Can we give a link to where they can understand how to install Maven?

Setup the truststore and keystore
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Create a :doc:`Java keystore and truststore <keystore-truststore>` for the Aiven for Apache Kafka service.
For the following example we assume:

* The keystore is available at ``KEYSTORE_PATH/client.keystore.p12``
* The truststore is available at ``TRUSTSTORE_PATH/client.truststore.jks``
* For simplicity, the same secret (password) is used for both the keystore and the truststore, and is shown here as ``KEY_TRUST_SECRET``

Use Flink with Aiven for Apache Kafka
-------------------------------------

The following example shows how to customise the ``DataStreamJob`` generated from the `Quickstart <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/configuration/overview/>`_ to work with Aiven for Apache Kafka.

1. Generate a Flink job skeleton named ``capitalizer`` using the Maven archetype:

   .. code:: shell

      mvn archetype:generate -DinteractiveMode=false \
        -DarchetypeGroupId=org.apache.flink -DarchetypeArtifactId=flink-quickstart-java \
        -DarchetypeVersion=1.15.1 -DgroupId=com.example -DartifactId=capitalizer \
        -Dversion=0.0.1-SNAPSHOT

> 2. Uncomment the Kafka connector in `pom.xml`:

Reviewer: Should we add `Uncomment` to our list of accepted words? any opinions @TibsAtWork ?

Reviewer 3: I vote yes. Add it (all lowercase) to `.github/vale/dicts/aiven.dic`

            .build();

         // ... processing continues here
      }
   
4. Tie the Kafka sources and sinks together with the ``StringCapitalizer`` in a single processing pipeline.

   .. code:: java

      // ... processing continues here
      env
        .fromSource(source, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "Kafka Source")
        .map(new StringCapitalizer())
        .sinkTo(sink);
      env.execute("Flink Java capitalizer");

Build the application
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

From the main ``capitalizer`` folder, execute the following Maven command to build the application:

.. code:: shell

   mvn -DskipTests=true clean package

The above command should create a ``jar`` file named ``target/capitalizer-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar``.

Run the applications
''''''''''''''''''''

If you have installed a `local cluster installation of Apache Flink 1.15.1 <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/try-flink/local_installation/>`_, you can launch the job on your local machine.
``$FLINK_DIR`` is the Flink installation directory.

.. code:: shell

   $FLINK_DIR/bin/flink run target/capitalizer-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar

> You can see that the job is running in the Flink web UI at http://localhost:8081.

Author: This is noted as a broken link, but ideally it would be clickable (and valid) for a user following the scenario.  It would be running on their local machine. Is there a correct way to note this?

Reviewer: I believe you can use flag it as code like `http://localhost:8081`

.. Note::

   While this example demonstrates running on a `local installation of Apache Flink 1.15.1 <https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/try-flink/local_installation/>`_, it can be applied to any cluster running Apache Flink.
   

>    Aiven also provides a hosted :doc:`/docs/products/flink` with built-in data flow integration with Aiven for Apache Kafka®

Reviewer: If we add this note at the top, we can remove it from here

Check the produced data
'''''''''''''''''''''''

> :doc:`/docs/products/kafka/howto/connect-with-command-line` describes how to configure the Kafka tools to send and receive data from the topics in this example.

Reviewer: I believe we can remove this section and just state that the user should be able to check the result of the uppercase function in the target Kafka topic.
